---
title: "Emacs & Org mode"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - Open_Source_Software
tags:
  - Emacs
  - Org mode
---

For anyone lacking experience with command-line-type computer
software, the approach to using packages such as Emacs can be
intimidating.

 <!--more-->

Luckily, the transition from Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs), with
icons and pull-down menus, to Emacs is facilitated by the fact that
Emacs also provides access to many features through icons and familiar
pull-down menus. 

It is true, to a certain extent, that this type of package was born as
an advanced text editor, especially suited for programmers. However
this does not mean that it's utility is confined solely to this
category of users. 

Emacs can be thought of as having many layers, with each layer
providing functionality of a different kind. At the most basic level,
text editing in the Emacs environment is a **very** powerful
feature. Whether you intend writing an **R** script, a Python program,
a diary, this post, or a novel, Emacs can do it. This is why Emacs is
often defined as the swiss-army knife of text editors or a *one
environment for all* solution.  The common theme between these tasks
is that they are all text-based. 

How would Emacs "know" whether a certain text is intended to be a
piece of **R** code or a chapter in your book?  The short answer is that
it mainly depends on the filename's extension (i.e. the part of the
filename which is after the dot): a file whose name is "filename.r"
will be interpreted by Emacs as being an **R** script, while
"filename.txt"&#x2026; yes, right! a simple text file. So, then
"filename.org" is an Org mode file.  

Whenever Emacs "sees" a filename extension it "recognizes", it will
automatically adopt the corresponding "mode", which means that Emacs
will become responsive to commands which are appropriate for that
given mode. Accordingly, Emacs's menu bar will change to reflect the
availablity of commands specific to the mode currently in use. In **R**
mode, Emacs will "understand" the **R** programming language,
appropriately highlighting **R** functions and objects in the
text. 

Coming to the point of this post, filenames with the ".org" extension
will put Emacs into Org mode, and this literally opens a world of
possibilities! Org mode in itself is a suprisingly rich and complex
tool. The header to the [org mode](https://orgmode.org) web site says:
"**Your life in plain text**", which is not an exaggeration! Org mode
provides a very clean interface, allowing the user to concentrate on
content and, probably more importantly, makes it very easy to organize
outlines into sections and subsections (called trees), which can be
expanded and collapsed and/or hierarchically reordered with great
ease. 

Nonetheless, Org mode takes care of all the formatting behind the
scenes, allowing the production of an elegant 'pdf' document complete
with title page, table of contents and page numbering, literally at
the click of a mouse. This, on its own would be enough to justify it's
use but, as the name implies (*Org* is short for **organizer**) Org mode
also provides the user with a rich set of functions to manage agendas
and to-do lists, all of which need not reside in a document of their
own: they can be typed into any document at any time (and remain
hidden in the 'pdf' output, if so desired) and then collected and
organized, again at the click of a mouse.

